what is the commonly held definition of
life itself the way that I consider it
is that we actually don't need to Define
life we need to figure out a theory that
helps us derive the properties of Life
Assembly Theory's key conjecture about
the nature of Life Is Life is the only
physics that can generate complex
objects we need a deeper explanation of
evolution in order to explain how
evolutionary systems that we recognize
as biology emerge in the first place you
have
disentangled the definition of life from
people's biases like a I'm cooking the
primordial
[Music]
soup this is Star Talk Neil degrass
Tyson your personal astrophysicist got
with me of course chuck knce chuck baby
hey Neil what's happening Lord Chuck
knce thank you yes all right my co-host
professional comedian standup comedian
yes and not always the same thing a
professional comedian and standup
comedian an actor an actor I've seen you
in some TV commercials acting like a
comedi you know dropped my sandwich when
I saw that uh there's I'm actually going
to do a sandwich commercial
next yeah all right no good good that
you're out there yeah you know got got
to keep it moving and we can say we knew
you
when you going to know me then
too so wonderful topic today oh my God
love it love me this topic a rich rich
topic so there's always been this
concept of Life as we know it right and
never caught on as an acronym Loy Life
as we know it I wonder
why such a
malifu acronym Loy never caught on Life
as we know it's like carbon based you
know all the all the usual things that
you throw into the mix and there's been
some effort lately okay to think about
life is we don't know it oh now I like
that is far more intriguing and and and
that seems to me opens up all manner of
possibility absolutely outside of the
box that we' put ourselves in right so
we have a World's expert we have Sarah
we have three names Sarah as do I uh
Sarah Amari Walker that's me and which
one do we go by Sarah Sarah okay we'll
do that oh thanks for making it simple I
triy we appreciate that really try so
Sarah you're you're an astrobiologist
and physicist theoretical physicist so
you're coming to this life question not
from the normal
to the table when you're talking about
life if not a biologist absolutely but
now you're going to bring some Physics
into the equation and I love me some
Physics yeah me too the the buck stops
at physics yeah okay there's an old
saying there's no understanding of
biology without chemistry right and
there's no understanding of chemistry
without physics there you go somehow
your subject of expertise be Lords over
the Lord I don't know how this happened
so so what brought you to the question
of life yeah I'm really interested in
fundamental laws of nature and where we
might find new ones so I think this is
the main motivator for me is to think
about life being explained by some
Universal physics we don't know yet whoa
okay that's
who damn Sarah coming in hot the only
way I know to go is not playing around
buddy didn't even warm up to that one
telling
you see it's like why don't you take a
couple warm-up tosses all right we
clocked that one at 97 M an hour
that's fantastic so so who so I don't I
can't think of a department a
traditional Department in a university
that would serve this cause and now I
learn you're deputy director of the
Beyond Center yes the that's audacious
now you guys are the people that make
the meat right the beyond meat oh no we
don't make meat yeah it's okay no we
don't do anything like that we're
actually it's like the full name of the
center is the Beyond Center for
fundamental concepts and science so
we're actually an exploratory Center
based at Arizona State and we think
about State University y not just in the
state of Arizona not yeah Arizona you're
on the faculty there that's right
excellent ASU they have really good
Astro folk there too okay yeah no I know
ASU all right yeah yeah and so this
Beyond Center uh are you co-founder of
that no the founder is um Paul Davies
but I'm the deputy director we know Paul
Davies yeah an astrophysicist like from
way back yeah yeah I like hanging out
with cosmologist so and the Beyond
Center is in the cosmology like it's in
the cosmology wing on ASU on like on the
campus okay I was looking at at least
one of your research papers you have
collaborators some of whom are based in
the Santa Fe Institute which is also one
of these Beyond yes I mean they're they
specialize in here's what everybody's
thinking but we're going to put a foot
outside that Circle yeah now let's go
beyond let's go beyond right right so
you're teaming up with other Beyond
people yes I like hanging out with
people that think outside the box
they're my favorite kind of people in
fact the some stuff I she's been working
on is not just the Box because box is a
three-dimensional object she's thinking
beyond the Tessa oh oh
wow look at that now I have pretty
shapes in my head I like
this so so so tell me I know there might
have been adjustments over the decades
but today what is the commonly held
definition of life itself the way that I
consider it is that we actually don't
need to Define life we need to figure
out a theory that helps us derive the
properties of life so we should be able
to predict features of Life anywhere it
should occur in the universe so that's
been my Approach it's very you know
theoretical physicist need to build
theories need to explain regularities in
nature she's got theoretical physics bad
I love
it it's bad in you it's never coming out
yeah it's a little fever with you you
got a little fever you got a little yeah
I do so I mean basically you're like
let's not worry about
identifying let's find out what creates
the identification yes in the first
place yes wow how do you go about doing
that um so I started you know in a true
theorist fashion I had probably like
seven or eight working definitions but I
was trying to find you know what's the
commonality under them but a lot of them
were about something to do with
information structuring matter was kind
of the early way I was thinking about it
wow okay I got you because then that
gets you all the way down to single
cells because even they are carrying
information so if you get to the root of
the information in what creates the
information then it may not even be a
cell that you're working with it could
be something outside of that Y and the
cell's a good example because it's very
complex and we don't think they can form
outside of evolution so the way that we
talk about these ideas now which is what
I'm really excited about is this Theory
assembly Theory I've been working on uh
with my collaborator Lee Cronin assembly
Theory assembly Theory it's a theory
yeah as a theorist should do yeah so
assembly Theory's key conjecture about
the nature of Life Is Life is the only
physics that can generate complex
objects interesting like a cell right or
a microphone or a
comedian we're not that complex
unfortunately very simple we're the
simplest of all life
yeah wait so you are declaring that
rocks and crystals and things is not
complex so therefore while you could in
principle
create those out of your modeling or out
of your theories that's not your target
of Interest so the nature of how we
Define complexity is it doesn't happen
spontaneously it requires Evolution so
there are some kinds of rocks and
minerals that do require say technology
to precisely engineer defects in a
crystal like if you want a perfect
diamond or something or um so there
would be rocks maybe that pass the
boundary of life but they would be
something life created or engineered so
I love this because you're you you you
poured out the mold and you said let me
start from
scratch and if you start from scratch
you're not biased by any preexisting
construct for what is or could or should
be right now you you can make almost
anything that has complexity yes and the
space of complexities is then what you
will study yes and that space is huge so
as an astronomical example uh you know I
like to use this molecule taxol as an
example it's molecular rates about
853 taxol what do we do with that taxol
is an anti-cancer drug it's just one
molecule that bio that's been created in
a tree fule it's a fat molecule it's a
big molecule but if you wanted to make
how many atoms are in that molecule um
approximately I mean hundreds or go
and I think it's like a couple hundred
yeah on that order yeah or 100 to 200 um
but if you wanted to make one molecular
structure of the same molecular formula
like every single threedimensional
confirmation it would fill a volume of
about one and a half universes just one
molecular formula one centim one
molecule per centimeter cute this is how
big chemical space is the reason it's
hard to make complex objects is there's
so many of them so evolution is
necessary to select in that space uhu so
you like we can't have a a universe and
a half full of just tax all it be very
boring right we live in a universe with
lots of different complex wait I have to
let me repeat what I think you said that
the complexity of what's it called again
taxol taxol it's not a special molecule
either I just picked one out of a hat
yeah we all have these in our hat don't
we yeah I'm carrying around the hat with
lots of jaol in
it so more like a ski mask if I think I
understand you yeah the complexity of
this molecule is such that if you
explored all molecules that could be
that complex MH there's not enough room
in the universe to it that's right so
clearly
that molecule's existence comes from
some prior requirement or Ur for that
configuration for that configuration
that's yes that's exactly right yes
that's exactly right so so let me ask
you this then because now I'm I'm a
little you'll have to forgive my
ignorance but I'm the only non-scientist
here thank God uh so I can say stupid
God had nothing to do with that okay
that's a very complex molecule okay
any okay um where exactly does
spontaneity and
selection cross and how do you
identify which is which which is which
is a progression and which is a
cross colation you know the kinds of
very simple molecules that might happen
on a planet you know can happen
spontaneously or if you're thinking like
Lego are easier for people than
chemistry if you have like a tray with a
bunch of Lego in it and you shake it
you're going to get some Lego sticking
together and making simple shapes so
those would be anous objects but you're
not going to be able to shake it long
enough to have hogwart's Castle
spontaneously emerge out of it that
would require a process of evolution and
refinement build a wand and a wand yeah
no magic though the universe doesn't
have magic oh at least not in the
scenario so
um she covering her she's like you know
what she's in a Beyond in I am a
theorist she's in a Beyond you got to
leave her for the massive room for the W
go ahead well I like you know magic for
me is uh yet to be you know regularized
in theoretical physics so there still
always has to be other things for us to
do any sufficiently advanced technology
is indistinguishable from Magic that's
right yeah or the laws of physics good
wow okay so go ahead back to you can't
get to the place of uh where you could
shake it and then have Hogwarts so so if
you do shake it and some stick together
those are like the amino acids yes Goa
yes because we did kind we did that with
the Miller Yuri experiment that's right
where he just throw some basic explain
that please everybody knows
a clearly they don't okay and by the way
of course I know I'm just talking about
the people out
there I mean there there may be someone
Regal of experiment yeah so uh Stanley
Miller was a PhD student I think he
published a paper in 1953 so it was a
long time ago but basically he put you
know a bunch of molecules that might
have been available on the early Earth
in a flask and put some lightning in his
flask and try to a sour of energy a
source of energy and he had a reducing
environment and then you know he got am
REM oxygen taken out and so he made
amino acids and you know people were so
shocked by this at the time they thought
little aliens were being crawling out of
you know life forms would be crawling
out of the test tube in a couple weeks
but that's not what happened right
unfortunately yeah the reducing
environment is that we think the early
Earth did not have oxygen right so so
he's trying to if if life's formed on
Earth under these condition you got to
create the conditions under which it so
what came so out of the nothing crawled
out nothing crawled out if you run the
experiment long enough you basically get
what we call a tar in Pre chemistry
which is just an undifferentiated mess
of a whole bunch of organic molecules
that we can't identify okay Prebiotic
chemistry means what Prebiotic chemistry
means chemistry that could plausibly
happen on the early Earth in the absence
of life before you have life before you
have life so it's or it's organic
chemistry yeah I like the word organic
chemistry better because Prebiotic kind
of makes it sound like it's predisposed
to become biological but there's no
teyes it sound like something you take
before meal
yeah people do confuse it with probiotic
all the time oh my God all that
probiotic chemistry yeah wait I I got
something here here we go here we go you
want to send me oh right you have the
primordial soup that's so adorable yes I
have a little can of primordial soup
okay and so in an emergency if we got a
jump start life you know just come come
back we can make that happen amazing
amazing as you can see Sarah Walker's
research and
those astronauts stranded in space help
us critically think about the origin of
life and future of humanity but with
recent advancements in technology we
might not have to worry about human
extinction after all scientists have
found a way to store the entire Human
Genome in a near indestructible 5D
memory Crystal enduring extreme
temperatures pressure and Cosmic
radiation for a smooth journey through
space when comes to groundbreaking
developments that challenge our
understanding of existence it's
important to see how different
scientific sources are interpreting the
research to fully understand it luckily
our partners at Ground news make this
much easier to do with their Vantage
plan you get access to original
reporting plus Insight on every article
covering it ground news provides this
level of critical analysis for every
topic you're interested in using
patented technology that helps us see
important perspectives we might have
otherwise missed head to ground. newstar
talk or scan our QR code and save 40% on
their top tier Vantage plan today making
it only $5 a month for unlimited access
to infinite knowledge and credible
research we can't recommend ground news
and their commitment to rigorous
analysis enough now back to the show so
I so i' like the the the the basic
principles that are being invoked here
very very simple Yes basic principles
okay so now you have you shake the Legos
some stick together now what now
selection needs to happen to get to
something like Hogwarts which means that
some parts have to start being uh you
know abundant in the environment and
then Reus to be build further structure
right and these these become your units
of your building units your bricks
that's right yes to build the edifice
yes and you say selection because they
are selected to succeed is that the idea
yes and also because selection is
excluding that huge space of other
possibilities so you're lost in space
that's right yeah I don't even want to
know how many possible configurations
there are of the Legos in the Lego
Hogwart set it's like 2,000 Lego if you
imagine all the things you can build out
of that crazy three univers so now so
now since you're looking for life
outside of this mhm let's consider in
the selection that life outside of what
I'm saying outside of the life that we
know oh yeah right you're looking for
life so other planets even so let's go
back to the primordial soup of another
planet and we have the shaken Legos okay
um but are there circumstances that
maybe led to selection for the
development here that may be different
there creating something different
entirely could that possibly be the case
yes I think so so I think assembly
Theory would predict yes because the
possibility space of the chemistry is so
large and what we've actually been able
to do is to find a threshold that we
expect life to emerge which is what you
described as the spontaneous to
selection Dynamics and it actually has
you know for the physics nerds out there
it has like properties of a phase
transition right so you go from spont
like random configurations of objects to
selected ones that have this historical
pathway so phase transition is all the
molecules are this way and then like a
moment later they're in a whole other
way configuration yeah so so but we live
this right okay uh we it's our fancy
word for it but when water becomes ice
ice that's ice is not water that's a
phas transition when water becomes s
it's a pH trans go and so we actually
generalize that term even in the early
Universe if the if there's everything is
this way and then something happens and
then it's another way we just call it a
phase transition gets us through and we
geek out on that like we physic just
love face transition almost anything can
happen through a pH transition and uh
like spooky things fun things dangerous
things so I shake the Legos some of them
stick together they're the Lego
counterpart to amino acids this was done
in the Miler Yuri
experiment it's amino acids which are
the building blocks of protein the
building blocks of Life as We Know It
All right on another
planet you shake it we're thinking it'll
also make amino acids so this becomes a
unit of life let's call it that or your
AI your what's at what what's the
assembly Theory at we We call we talk
about assembly index is the number of
steps to make an object okay so that's a
step y that's a step okay if that's the
same step everywhere y then that greatly
limits what comes after because you're
not starting not everything is possible
in that early first unit yeah this is a
great point the the interesting thing
there is how varied geochemistry is on
different planets and actually even if
if you look at amino acids there's
hundreds of them that we've identified
in meteorites right and not all of them
not all of them are in biology right so
if you find them in meteorites it means
they're out there out there they're
being made they're being made but
they're not here or or even if they come
here we're not using them well right
they don't serve a purpose here right
exactly okay that's the point yeah so um
so I don't think that we should have an
expectation that all the steps on the
pathway to something as complex as cell
would be the same because you know maybe
the first few are similar but as you
build up the complexity of the chemistry
there's so many paths you could take so
many kinds of molecules that there
should be a point where planets start to
diverge in what kind of biochemistry
evolves out of the geochemistry so let's
Okay aliens can be really weird that's
what I was going to I what I was going
to get to it's like it sounds to me like
a like a virus could be an alien like
highly effective like lots of
information carrying out like uh you
know purpose uh procreating
you know I mean it when you if if you
can look for something like that how do
you even begin to uh narrow the search
once you start looking out there yeah so
the great thing about assembly theory is
we can actually measure uh how assembled
a group of molecules is with
quantitively Quant actually with yeah
quantitatively we have predictions that
we can make from the theory but we can
test them in the lab and so we have a
way of measuring the complexity of a
molecule independent of knowledge of
what the molecule is and we can just do
it with a mass
spectrometer okay see this this is some
this is physics badass physics coming in
in the doorway here all right so we like
measurements they ground Us in reality
right evolutionary steps sometimes we
think of them that way is can involve
added complexity so why what is what are
you doing that's different from that so
evolutionary theory as we have it now
works really well for biology on Earth
but it doesn't help us understand life
on other planets or solve the original
life because we don't know where life
comes from to begin with so we need have
a sample of one yeah we have a sample
one it's a big problem we need a deeper
explanation of evolution in order to
explain how evolutionary systems that we
recognize as biology emerg in the first
place is there any chance that it could
just be a mistake you know that might be
true but then it's not very interesting
from the perspective of theoretical
physics cuz there's nothing to explain
um okay oh good answer yeah I mean it
doesn't stop the search though but
you're right it's not it's not very uh
interesting at that point so let let's
make sure we're on the same page here
when I think of how a biologist would
Define life which has been there's been
variations on that over the decades but
what comes to mind is it's something
that has a
metabolism so it uses energy from its
environment it reproduces and it evolves
D in a darwinian way yeah you have
things to add to that subtract from that
I I don't or can you just oppose both
what do you what do you call what he
just said in from your where you are
what is that and then where are you
different so so one definition that
people like to use which ENC capitulates
what you're saying as like fundamental
pieces of it is life is a
self-sustaining chemical system capable
of darwinian evolution it's quite a
mouthful um that is what he just said
though yeah it is exactly exactly what
he it it totally is so you know there's
a lot of problems actually from my
perspective with that definition um one
of them is whether you regard life to be
self- sustaining so viruses are an
example people don't know whether to
place them as life or not um because
they're not self-sustaining on their own
and in fact when we're doing uh you know
chemical evolution in the laboratory
like trying to study molecules uh you
know we don't know how to call them
alive because they're not
self-sustaining because graduate
students are pipeing you know like they
require the graduate student um so
pipetting that's a verb p it's a little
thing a little glass draw in there yeah
yeah so yeah you got to you got to move
the molecules from one tube to the next
to do artificial why you doing you say I
am crushing your head okay sorry right
so so there's many or or my favorite
example is like you know a parasite that
um you know sits in the the brain of an
ant and you know Pilots the ant right so
I I talk about that example in my book
love that Parasite by the way it's so
crazy but is that is that a living is
that a life form cuz it's actually you
know it's a symbi an right so or
actually a parasite um so this idea of
self- sustaining is kind of very
problematic for a lot of uh reasons I
don't actually think life is defined by
chemistry so this is again getting at
deeper physical principles wow so I um
include
technology yeah first shots fired yeah
okay yeah so my definition or well my
understanding of life I don't have a
definition my understanding of Life Is
Life is the things that can only be
produced by Evolution and selection and
technology is also example of that and
that's not chemical um and also this
idea of it being self- reproducing I
mean there are plenty of humans that
can't self- reproduce actually no human
can individually self- reproduce right
I've been trying but there's plenty of
things I've been trying
yeah but but but a mule for example is
certainly a liive can't reproduce can't
reproduce yeah and those are those are
kind of odd examples cuz cuz we bred
them but even if you think of like a bee
in a colony right like most of the bees
can't reproduce alone or they not alive
because they're part of a social network
so so so the traditional definition of
Life have issues lots of issues every
single word plus there there are stars
that have metabolisms and they live out
their lives and die and then they
explode and send their materials to
other gas clouds that make other stars
so they do reproduce and there's some
heritability there because of the
elements that get made in one star
generation one star goes into another so
are stars alive right we can ask that
question yes we could so can ask any
question so why even have a definition
at all so I think definitions are useful
hortic in the absence of having a more
fundamental understanding and so one of
my favorite um sort of analogies that
people in my field make is like how
would you define water before you knew
atomic theory you would describe it as
like a clear liquid it might you know be
a liquid at room temperature but you
wouldn't really understand what water is
until you understand what atoms are and
how they combine to make H2O um and
that's sort of where we are with
definitions of life we can kind of
describe effectively its properties but
we macroscopic yeah you know what you're
look you know what you're looking at you
just don't know really what it is yeah
that's exactly right right and I want to
know really what it is I want to know at
the same level that we understand our
other theories of physics like gravity
or quantum mechanics you have
disentangled yeah the definition of Life
yeah from people's biases right like a
chef yeah like when they cooking the
primordial
soup when when they deconstruct when
they deconstruct the dish deconstruct
the dis and you see all the you're like
what the hell is that I know right
I I had eggplant Parmesan the eggplants
here the CH I said dude what am I paying
you to do exactly the the parmesan shows
up on
Tuesday all right so so let's get back
to this any good
theory in fact I I'm I'm a theory snob
okay forgive me I love that no it's okay
I'm also a theory snob no Theory snob in
me about your I want to know what your
definition of theor I'm not sure that's
a very good theory at all
that's not the kind of theory that we
would let into this club no de who
sponsored
you sorry I'm sorry if you have an idea
that you're still testing MH then we
should call it a
hypothesis and once it's tested and
verified and supported by multiple
people and not just your lab in the
Beyond Institute or Beyond Center then
it can Elevate to the level of a theory
which gives us the thermodynamics Theory
quantum theory relativity Theory but
it's not Sarah's Theory until it's
multiply supported I would call it
Sarah's hypothesis and your colleagues
your hypothesis am I allowed will you
grant me that I'll grant you that I
think there are clear reasons why we
called a theory and for me what theories
are is are explanatory paradigms like
they're actual Frameworks that have
brought have to predict something that
we have found have you what have you
predicted that we have found we have
predicted that there should be a
threshold above which only molecules
produced by life should reside and we've
tested that experimentally wait wait
wait wait wait wait see I missed that
the Universe can generate comp you know
simple molecules it can't generate
complex molecules without Evolution and
selection that suggests a boundary
experiment a boundary that just random
chemistry can explore but it can't go
beyond oh and we've tested that with
living and non-living samples and even
some that NASA sent and this was done by
Lee cronin's lab they sent samples and
they blinded them and they tried to conf
like you know a blinded sample is one
that you don't know the identity of the
sample and they tried to really trick
them they sent them merch and meteorite
which is one of the most complex
inorganic non-biological samples in the
solar system and it still classified the
experimental uh approach still
classified it correctly as non-living um
and what we saw was only the living
samples had an assembly index value this
number of minimal steps above 15 which
is not a magic number it's just an
experimentally confirmed number so so
you're suggesting that nowhere in the
universe without some other driving
foring on the system would give you a
complexity higher than this about 15 but
that was for a specific set of chemical
like kinds of bonds that can form so we
don't know if 15 is a universal number
it might be different in a different
planet with different geochemistry but
the threshold is there is is the point
so that was the first prediction that
we've made that we've tested and also
the other thing that we have that hasn't
come out yet is actually constructing
phog gentic trees hasn't been published
yet hasn't been published yet uh
constructing phog gentic with no genomic
information just molecular information
taking it stuff down to molecules
molecules molecules contain their
history wow but I think your point is
really important about a theory and
obviously like this theory is still
under development but I think theories
have played a really important role in
the history of physics in terms of
trying to unify a broad set of phenomena
that we thought were different I would
just initially I would just call them
hypothesis yeah I think that would then
later be elevated to Theory once it has
been verified yeah you should kind of
drop it down hypothesis cuz then when
it's elevated we can call it Sarah
Theory I don't want it to be called
Sarah Theory though what do you mean you
don't want it to be called sah Theory
course what it does is speaking as a as
a educator yeah what it does is it
protects the usage of the word theory
for things that are experimentally
objectively true right right otherwise
you get people in Congress I
quote we should teach Evolution only as
a theory
uh and therefore teach other theories as
well Evolution it was trying to get God
in there and so so which we're
susceptible right if a theory is
something that's sort of in progress and
we don't not really sure yet and then it
gets shown to be false people will say
well we're waiting for the day that
relativity theory is shown to be false
that's not going to happen yeah right so
it's I know I understand that I think
working from the scientist side of it
it's really interesting because I think
also I've noticed that you know
distinguishing between a model and a
theory is hard that's another one yeah
yeah yeah so these are this is on some
level it's semantic but it's semantic
just it makes my job easier if we get
the semantics right we want your job to
be easier don't mess with my trying to
so again you're telling me left to its
own devices the universe can construct
molecules of complexity level 15 in your
units of complexity yes uh Paradigm yes
okay after that what does it require it
requires a system that has some
constraints on what kind of molecules
get produced that favors one kind or
another favors selection selection
there's that word we're back to we're
back to that okay I Goa so whereas
whereas getting to a complexity level of
15 does not require that that's right
and so a key component of passing that
threshold is actually storing memory in
the system because you have to remember
the steps mhm so you can get to it every
time
that's right oh otherwise it's just
randomly getting oh my gosh yeah that
makes sense oh yeah you have to know
what not to do in order to know what to
do so you're saying this meteorite and
this meteorite can both get to
complexity level 15 because they both
formed in the void of the early Universe
the early solar system but without a
driving force yeah without something to
remember molecules that the meteorite
has made in the past and then build
further complexity on top of that can't
do it so now you need some you need a
system to store information and DNA can
do that
yes famously yes H so is do well I guess
there's no way to know I was going to
say is DNA because like all of
everything around us you know that's
organic we all share this right so does
is that is that optimized in any way for
life do we look at that as a model that
is optimized I like that you because the
merchants and meteorite doesn't contain
living molecules right all right so uh
if you're going to get what anyone would
call
life why doesn't it select the same path
because this is a question that's come
up uh my colleagues in
geology pose the question and I didn't
have a good answer it was an intriguing
question they look at multiple planets
and they're finding the same rocks this
comes directly out of what you're saying
they find the same rocks even though
it's a completely different planet yeah
same rocks that is they understand the
bio the the the the The Rock chemistry
of what they the composition and the
like there's Basalt there there's Basalt
here okay they came out of a volcano
volcano here volcanoes there why can't
life have the same consistency that
geology does it's it it's because of the
complexity well say that you have an
answer for that yeah you come out of
your assembly Theory with an answer to
that yeah that's right can you assemble
something like DNA that isn't DNA that
would be that would oh
oh watch out hello okay Sor you buried
the lead okay sorry okay oh my God okay
sorry all right all right so so that's
amazing what prel can store information
for you and and go beyond your 15 Steps
that and do you have this thing locked
up that's that is what I I have to say
I'm a theorist not an experimentalist so
I haven't built these things myself but
there I mean even but even in the Bas of
just synthetic biology people have
alternatives to DNA and RNA which are
the usual let me just remind people
synthetic biology is basically
genetically modified organism right
that's what that is it's got this new
branding but it's that's what it's start
we start out thinking about it as GMOs
because nobody wants this take
genetically modified anymore yeah so
synthetic biology yeah so there's all
kinds of different they're they're
called xnas like um you know alternative
nucleic acids basically that people have
studied so so those are real molecules
that people have validated the lab and
actually work in living cells but what
we're trying to get at that's a bit
deeper than that with assembly theory is
actually looking at the iteration of
chemical space and trying to predict
what molecules could be and right now
where we're doing that most um
significantly is for drug design that
makes sense and predicting
pharmaceutical drugs and there are there
are some approaches also if you're
talking about validation of a theory uh
there are some places where we've able
been able to predict molecules and
actually synthesize them and then
knowing that they'd be stable and so for
example one place is really interesting
is looking at non-addictive opioids so
if you want to make an opioid you want
to keep the opioid groups like that
those parts of the molecule and then
make it non- addictive you actually have
to look at molecules that are not
addictive and then try to combine their
features well you get them together and
then you figure out how you make the non
addictive molecule bind in such a way
that you get the result of the opioid
without y so you can look at the steps
to making both kinds of molecules and
then you can combine those steps to look
at other kinds of molecules freaking
crazy okay so so how so this is what
solving alien life will give you new
drugs oh we going to get to aliens in a
minute drugs that's good let me tell you
something make sure you leave with that
when you're going for your
grants it is part of the strategy
actually it's a good one how molecules
behave so give me an example of
something that can encode store
information that is not DNA well you can
store information in RNA and protein
those are already in cells but there's
one I like is and I actually don't know
if people have stored information in it
is called PNA it's peptide nucleic acid
I like that because it's kind of a cross
between a protein and DNA right all
right and so so most of the places where
people study these kind of alternative
nucleic acids is just you know in
synthetic biology Labs but there there's
a whole host of them that you could use
just the same way that you can store
information in DNA you could just write
a sequence of bases in one of these kind
of molecules minerals are more fun
though trying to store information in
mineral is pretty
crazy whoa so okay that's pretty wild
now uh why would you be storing
information in the mineral minerals are
really important in the origin of Life
chemistry and we think that they were
actually the first templates for
information to actually pattern
chemistry in specific ways and they
retain you know they have an AP periodic
pattern to them which means they can
contain a lot of information and they it
was perfectly periodic there's hardly
any information that's right right yeah
so this goes all the way back has hardly
any information right because everything
is regular yeah right so if you if it's
varies but then
repeats you can stick something in there
and repeat it and remember it yes okay
fascinating yeah so so minerals might
have been the templates for the first
genetic information actually gotta
gotcha you ever wanted one of your
questions on the universe answered we
all have questions about the universe
black holes to quazars quantum
entanglement wormholes there is no end
to the depths of cosmic curiosity well
the entry level of patreon membership
with Star Talk gets you just that I
think it starts at $5 a month you have
access to the question line that reaches
our Cosmic query programming and not
only that we produce a special Cosmic
queries installment just for patreon
members so if you weren't the director
of the Hayden planetarium what do you
think you would be doing what okay but
this have to be another Universe it
wouldn't happen in this Universe okay
I'd be I'd be a a songwriter for
Broadway musicals oo so that's the entry
level and the perks ascend from there uh
there's a level in fact where we send
you a an autographed copy of one of my
latest books uh right now it's Star
Messenger Cosmic perspectives on
civilization and it's signed with my
fancy fountain pen with purple ink so I
invite you to just check the link below
and all of that money goes to our
ability to experiment with new ways of
bringing the universe down to earth so
thank you for those who have already
joined and we welcome others to
participate in this Grand Adventure of
what it is to bring the universe down to
earth as always keep looking up so now
we want to look for aliens mhm how did
what you do inform that so so the the
current way that we're informing it I
think that's most significant is this
ability to look for complexity in the
universe as a bios signature instead of
looking for specific molecules that life
on Earth generated and we can do that
with a mass spectrometer so we can just
you know fly to another body in our
solar system and try to infer whether
there's High assembly molecules there
right whether or not it's crawling out
of a beaker doesn't make a difference or
well we haven't seen that yet so and we
haven't seen Little Critters crawling
around on you know enceladus's plumes or
on mars or anything so I think we we
need better Tools in your Universe of
complexity it is a measure of the
complexity of
information and artificial intelligence
is a level of complexity that's even
Beyond bi what we think of as biological
how do you
rate artificial intelligence as it's
currently expressed in our world on your
scale of so I definitely think
artificial intelligence is light but I
also I know shocking huh shocking but I
also think your mic why was I programmed
to feel pain oh did you feel pain from
that I'm so sorry I didn't mean to
induce pain um often you know like yeah
there's a lot of shock value to things I
say so I I guess I induce pain that's a
very shocking statement um why why do
you feel that way though well so I think
you want to make a distinction between
what you might call life and what you
might call alive and this actually comes
derived from the theory and the way I've
been thinking about life for a long time
so the things I would qualify is life or
anything that requires evolution
selection to produce them and artificial
intelligence do not exist on a planet
unless there are billions of years of
evolution to make intelligent beings
like us that are capable of engineering
them so in that sense they are is not
creating AI there there are no large
language models on Mars unless we put
them there so therefore we are the
remembered molecular complexity to
create that yes we're like the minerals
in printing on the genomic information
of sense I got to say I didn't want to
actually agree with this but now I'm
thinking of perhaps in a world maybe
even our own where we're a couple
hundred years in the future or we have
somehow mucked things up to the point
where we're not going to be here so we
then turn to artificial intelligence
imprint it with the ability to do
everything that we've do it continues to
evolve in our absence and then somebody
comes and finds us but not this organic
life it finds us in the form of what we
left behind which was artificial
intelligence smoking
before I have a more optimistic whole
story I did create a whole story out of
that and it wasn't very optimistic but
go ahead I think I think when people
Envision that future they don't Envision
us still being here but you know like
cells are inside our bodies and part of
like the evolutionary structure we are
they've been here for billions of years
I don't think artificial intelligence or
technolog is going to replace us it's
going to become part of a larger
integrated system of technology and
biology that's coevolving on the planet
I agree with that as a beginning but I
think unfortunately our nature is our
pent and proclivity for self-destruction
which will leave artificial intelligence
behind your glass is half empty I'm a
glasses half full kind of person let's
take it to the next level goad okay go
ahead actually I have the answer to the
half empty half full question excellent
yeah drink
it what is the answer that's a profound
question no no no I to me it's no longer
profound if you have a vessel uhhuh and
you're adding liquid to it right and it
reaches the halfway point it's half full
if you have a vessel and
it's half empty it's half empty so
depends on where you start no it it
depends the rate of change or it's the
like in calculus would be the first
derivative of the volume of liquid
that's in it right is that positive or
negative and then it's half full or half
empty history matters yes yes exactly
very assembly theoretic and very evolved
see see I just got a compliment you did
don't wor I caught the compliment okay
all right so let's take it up a notch
mhm if we are all
simulated by some alien juvenile in a
basement yeah uh well they just
simulated you to think and say that sure
in that full up variant or simulate a
surrounding where it would lead you to
say that even you being senian and
capable ofing D simulation would say
something like that it's exactly what
you would say
so that was very good that was good that
was good so a
simulation
is uh zeros and ones
mhm on a chip mhm creating information
mhm that's stored in zeros and ones and
manipulated and maneuvered is that alive
so simulation are you alive in a
simulation oh I don't think that we're
living in a simulation and the sort of
key evidence there is you just talked
about the simulation having to run in a
chip which means it needs a physical
hardware and there is always under
there's always a physical substrate
underlying any simulation that as far as
we understand so there's always a
physical reality at the bottom why isn't
the simulation empowering you to
discover molecules that comprise your
body it does it does actually because
you can have ai driven exploration of
chemical space for example so that's a
clear place where a simulation is
driving exploration and making things
physical that aren't physical in the
absence of a Sim exctly because we joke
about well we talk about if if this
whole world is simulated it would be
really inefficient to simulate parts
that no sentient being is abbing at any
moment so You' only simulate where you
need to
sim if I want to dig to the center of
the earth I don't need to make it until
I'm getting to the to the Center of the
Earth and you simulate it as I'm doing
it and so the simulation is creating the
molecules that I'm measuring as having
complexity I think we see observational
evidence of that and just with our
Technologies and I think that's really
important and I think there it's
explanatory but when you say the
universe is a simulation I don't think
it gives you any additional explanatory
power I find it to be a useless
hypothesis well that's I know what
you're saying because then everything is
resol it's like I said she just called
me useless no no I'm just kidding no
what I say to that is it doesn't make a
difference because at the end of the
week I still owe Visa you know
$210 so what what difference does it
make if if the whole universe is a
simulation if at the end of the week I
still ow visa and you can still write
down like laws of physics that describe
your Universe say make a difference it's
all the same oh I understand it you're
saying the distinction is not
interesting if you can't make the
distinction that's right so I think
simulations being an emergent property
that the Universe creates the one that
happens through evolution is interesting
and then asking about the physical
nature of simulations and why life
generates them that's interesting saying
the universe is a simulation kicks the
can way too far back for me to give any
explanatory power to what we're talking
about oh so because you can't figure it
out it don't mean nothing
don't you know you're in a room with
theoretical
physicist that's exactly like that's my
card we'll grant you your complexity
okay in your assembly Theory Universe
I'm magnanimous of you I
know we Grant it Star Talk grants
you assembly a badge for this or
something I'll find something here p on
you here I love all so or I'm like
kned so
in that does it say anything about Free
Will we've had a few episodes on that
subject uh with some leading thinkers in
in the area indeed what can you say
anything about it yeah I have a lot to
say on it but I think the sort of most
important thing is I think you can have
free will and be consistent with the
laws of physics as we understand them
and the reason for that you can have
free will you can because people were
arguing that you couldn't because the
laws of physics are in everything you
say can do that's right and then the
flip side of it is like you know the
universe is totally random and then you
have absolute freedom right so it's not
that you have total um or you you know
Free Will is a trade-off between the
sort of control and the freedom and I
think what happens is when you have
these evolved structures that are
building complexity they become really
constrained by their history but they
still have some freedom in terms of the
kind of complexity they can generate and
so um and and this becomes sort of
deeply intrinsic to what they are so
they are deterministic in some sense but
there's still some freedom for them to
actually make action normally when we
think of free will we think of I'm
deciding right but really if you come it
from a molecular point of view it's
whatever the molecule is going to make
and it and it'll work within the space
of options it has available yeah freeo
Free Will is executed over time right so
this is also the thing it's not
instantaneous we don't have free will to
be in Arizona right now but we could be
there tomorrow so I think this you know
a key point that we're missing is it's
not like like you have instantaneous
command over what the Adams in your
bottom are doing but you can make
decisions over time and even your
decisions are determined by what came
before so they're executed over a period
of time yes just the fact that you know
uh well I'm a comedian well I didn't
just wake up one day and go I'm a
comedian it has PR it has precedent
right so Mak assembly Theory makes some
really radical conjectures about like
the future being larger than the past
and so there's also some freedom in
terms of because of this idea building
complexity the future is always more
complex than larger in sort of the the
space of possibilties because because
it's not here though and no but I get
this and it helps that we have an
expanding Universe if you want exactly
no this is exactly right the universe is
getting bigger accomodate exactly this
um what does this say about entropy so
oh yeah entropy requires oh I want to
hear this not hold on hold on he's got
his popcorn let me get my popcorn out
he's after all that we've been through
we got the entropy now got Toopy wants
disorder as as as a direction in which
systems move that's right right um so
but the the reason that that hap like we
describe things that way is because of
the way we label States like entropy
depends on a couple key features one is
like you as an observer labeling the
particular configurations and the other
one being able to talk about an ensemble
of systems that are identically prepared
and there's some statistical Trend and
what is happening in the biosphere is
complexity is increasing it's kind of
like an entropic tendency but it's
actually overc configurations like the
common tutorial space and so I don't
really actually think the second law is
telling us that things are thody second
law of thermics is necessarily telling
us that things are trending toward
disorder I think there's a deeper law
underlying that that can also account
for the structure of what we see in life
but of course there's still entropy you
know physics would say we're getting
it's only for closed systems that you
evolve towards a higher um but of course
the universe might be an open system no
no but I'm saying but Earth is clearly
not a closed system we have sunlight
coming in that's right and and so we've
credited that infusion of energy as a
pump for the development of complexity
yes that wouldn't otherwise be there
right like if there were no sun none of
this crap would be here but you know one
of the things that's been really hard
from the perspective of of theoretical
physics as it's written now not like
what new laws might be present in
biology to explain is that it looks like
the the what life is doing is changing
the nature of the underlying State space
as as we talk about it in physics as
it's going along so it's hard to define
something like entropy when you can't
count the same things at every instance
in time so you you want you want a
second and a half law of
thermodynamics that applies to The
observed Universe the second law of
Thermodynamics is an approximate law I
think we we all know this a statistical
statement I would like an exact law oh
wow you are very demanding I got to tell
you you are not messing around yeah
theoretical physicists don't mess around
wow wow okay screw you
Newton it's all his fault and and you
put all of this in a book there a book
oh my gosh life as no one knows it
except for you
uh I still don't know it either I'm
still one of the no
ones I love it life as no one including
the author but it's the whole
foundations of that thinking yes and and
I'm glad it doesn't just live in this
conversation because it lives in the
pages of this book so this came out just
recently that's um just summer 2024 oh
good for you yeah yeah congratulations
thank you congratulations your first
book it is my first book excellent
wonderful excellent and at the rate
you're going more books should are you
kidding me we just wrote one today we
wrote one just now are you kidding
me no so look look forward to What
Becomes of this Branch thinking I'm
hoping we will do an experiment where an
alien crawls out of it I'm GNA say I'm
not with
you just just G to go on the record and
say no no you don't want the alien
crawling out nothing crawling out of
craing out of anything but the
understanding that would come with that
would be that want that's a pure
scientist but we'll learn exactly you
know right I think there's famous quote
from Kurt vonet who says the last word
ever spoken by any human is between two
scientists and one says the other let's
try the experiment the other
way there you go that's it that makes
perfect sense you're all excited about
it is the last words ever spok spoken
yeah going to be you it's going to start
I'm a theorist I'm not
doing all right see this is another
reason to be a theorist yeah you know
have to do the last experiment all right
well this has been a delight thank you
for sharing your expertise and your
wisdom and your knowledge coming from
Beyond literally Beyond yeah I saw what
you did there yeah cool yeah very very
good and you got to keep us
appraised of uh new development
fascinating Frontier I got to give it to
you and and do you do you have a a
pipeline into NASA as they set up
experiments to look for Life CU we just
had um funky spoon um Dr David David
he's great David grinspoon we just had a
few days ago really yeah and so he's
guiding NASA's search for life and if
you have something to tell him you you
better tell him quick yeah yeah I could
tell him but actually what I'm trying to
do now is prepare data because when
you're talking about artificial
intelligence people are also trying to
use it for life detection and we don't
have good data to train models on so
right right it's not like a large
language model for aliens that's right
we don't have one right right right
awesome all right that's a lot of fun
thanks okay let me let me let me see if
I can put some Cosmic perspective on
this on this yeah yeah yeah yeah always
throughout time throughout the history
of civilization somebody had to think
out of the box somebody does it first
and they always look a little weird to
everybody else they look a little
strange and most people who do that are
just
wrong let's be honest about this there's
a trash been a people who stepped out of
the box thinking they had new insights
into the nature of reality and they did
not so how do you find the ones that
work that move where we all are and how
we
think it needs to be subject to
experiment and observation it can't just
live in your head and make sense to you
and no one else so for me watching these
new steps to think about life to bring a
little bit of of physics theoretical
physics into the
equation to me is an important first
step and I look forward to where this
will take
us just short of the alien crawling out
of the
box unless it's an alien that can help
us don't stop short of the possibility
that the alien can help save us from
ourselves that is a cosmic perspective
there's been another episode of Star our
talk taking you to places that we hadn't
been the day
before Sarah Delight thank you thank you
guys thanks thanks for coming to my
office here at the Hayden planetarium it
was really fun in New York City the
American Museum of Natural History all
way up from Arizona yes so tell Folks at
ASU I said hi I will we love them all
down there yeah in the heat do you know
Tempe Arizona is one quarter of a mile
from the surface of the Sun did you yeah
that's funny I knew
that that's an old joke it hit 120
degrees this past summer right yeah
that's typical yeah oh yeah yeah all
right sometimes we can't even fly planes
it's so hot oh cuz the the not enough
air density coming through the thing
that's right wow there's some good
physics for you yeah yeah it's not that
it's not just the temperature it's the
density of the air yeah well you need a
longer Runway or something yeah yeah we
got to call it quits there Chuck always
good to have you man always a pleasure
and again thank you so much my
congratulations and good luck on life as
no one knows it not even the author
that's what makes this especially
intriguing hopefully someone will know
it one day one day one day all right
start talk here keep looking up
[Music]